Update documentation (#138)
WayScience/NF1_3D_organoid_profiling_pipeline: docs/source/features/chammi75.md

# CHAMMI-75 Features

## Description

CHAMMI-75 features are deep learning-based embeddings extracted using
[MorphEm](https://huggingface.co/CaicedoLab/MorphEm), a self-supervised Vision
Transformer (ViT) model pre-trained on the CHAMMI benchmark dataset of
fluorescence microscopy images.

> DOI: <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-024-02349-9>

Reviewer: Consider citing this project within a `CITATION.cff` references block (where you can collect various references related to the project in one spot).

Author: added

## Architecture

The model uses a **Bag-of-Channels (BoC)** strategy:

* Each fluorescence channel is treated as an independent grayscale image
* The single channel is replicated into 3 copies to satisfy the ViT's RGB input requirement
* The ViT encoder processes each channel independently

> * The **CLS token** output (384-dimensional) is extracted as the feature vector

Reviewer 2: is this 384-d embedding per channel?

Author: Yes, I updated language here to reflect per channel and per object

> * The **CLS token** output (384-dimensional) is extracted as the feature vector

Reviewer: When we say "vector" here, what kind? Would it be more clear to say "multi-array"?

Author: I will stick with vector for now as it is  not multi-array but a 1D vector

Author: It become a multi-array after we combine the 1D vectors

```{mermaid}
graph TD
    A["Cropped 2D image Y × X, single channel"] --> B["Replicate channel→ 3, Y, X"]
    B --> C["SaturationNoiseInjector PerImageNormalize Resize 224×224"]
    C --> D["ViT Encoder MorphEm"]
    D --> E["CLS token 384-dim embedding"]
```

## Pre-processing Pipeline

> Before passing images to the model, three transforms are applied in sequence:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As CHAMMI recommends, before passing images to the model, we apply three transforms in sequence:
```

True this is a recommendation?

Author: Less so recommended as required this is a part of their model card on hugging face. Added in.

1. **SaturationNoiseInjector** – Saturated pixels (value = 255) in the input
   channel are replaced with uniform random noise sampled from `[200, 255]`.
   This prevents the model from learning artefacts caused by pixel saturation.

> 2. **PerImageNormalize** – Each image is normalised independently using

Reviewer 2: normalized using InstanceNorm2d which does.... what?

Author: This normalizes the tensor shape to be correct for the Net.

   `InstanceNorm2d`. This accounts for differences in staining intensity across
   wells and batches.

3. **Resize** – The image is resized to 224 × 224 pixels to match the ViT
   input resolution.

## Features Extracted

| Feature | Description |
|---------|-------------|

> | CHAMMI.1 – CHAMMI.384 | CLS-token embedding dimensions from the MorphEm ViT encoder |

Reviewer 2: where is the label encoding for channel?

Author: These get added at the time of the feature call. The function does not take an opinion on how it names features and leaves that up to the user.

Currently **384 features** are extracted per channel per object.

## Applications

CHAMMI-75 features are useful for:

* Capturing morphological phenotypes that are not described by hand-crafted features
* Identifying subtle treatment effects in fluorescence images

> * Transfer learning and downstream classification tasks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Capturing phenotypes that are missed by hand-crafted features.
* Identifying subtle treatment effects in fluorescence images.
* Downstream classification tasks.
```

It's unclear what you mean by "transfer learning"

Author: implemented
